---
---

<p>In May of 1914 at the Rheinpark in Cologne, Henry van de Velde inaugurated the Deutscher Werkbund’s first exhibition held in response to Konrad Adenauer's call. The exhibition's planning had begun in 1912 and its construction in early 1914. By that time, the Deutscher Werkbund had become at the forefront of Germany's project for modernity and industrialism. <i>Vom Sofakissen zum Städtebau</i>, the time had now come for the Deutscher Werkbund to announce itself with a grandiose exhibition. As forerunners of the Bauhaus, the Deutscher Werkbund’s band of architects had taken it upon themselves to dissolve the boundaries between the notion of <em>Art</em> as experienced or imagined by many and the notion of <em>Industry</em>. Painting, sculpture, architecture, and city planning were to become one and the same. Against this background, it comes to no surprise that the Deutscher Werkbund never proclaimed itself an artistic movement. A simple look at a few key buildings from the exhibition, however, begs the question of <q><i>what, then, is art?</i></q> and, by extension, <q><i>what is architecture?</i></q>. This essay looks at Bruno Taut’s exhibited <i>Glashaus</i>, a grand palace of glass, gold, silver, water, and precious stone.</p>

<p><q>The <i>Glashaus</i></q>, Bruno Taut had proclaimed, <q>has no purpose other than to be beautiful</q>. Objectively, the <i>Glashaus</i> was an impressive manifestation of the glass industry. Commissioned by the Luxfer Prism Glass Company, it utilised the company’s newly-patented system of structural glazing of <dfn>Glaseisenbeton</dfn>, which came to be known as the Keppler System. Yet, to Bruno Taut, it was an edifice of Architecture. In an article titled <i>Eine Notwendigkeit (A Necessity)</i>, Bruno Taut expressed why he thought the <i>Glashaus</i> and what it represented were absolutely necessary. Upon its construction, the <i>Glashaus</i> was inscribed with a line of prose that sought the same.</p>

<p><blockquote>Glass brings a new era; building in brick only does us harm <br /> Without a glass palace life is a burden <br /> Coloured glass destroys hatred <br /> Light seeks to penetrate the whole cosmos and is alive in the crystal.</blockquote></p>

<p>With these words the <i>Glashaus</i> announced itself as the pinnacle of a long tradition of glass architecture. This <em>Glass Architecture</em>, as declared in an exhibition pamphlet by Bruno Taut, was preluded by the gothic cathedral. The gothic cathedral, with its <q>inappropriate nave and even less practical tower</q>, appealed to Bruno Taut as a declaration of the purpose of architecture. The purpose of architecture and the purpose of design, he thought, is more than the fulfilment of mere basic necessities: <q>To view architecture as nothing more than nicely-designed functional forms or as ornamental wrappings around our essential needs</q>, he says, <q>is to assign it the role of a craft and places too little value on its importance in our lives</q>. <q>Only when human desire goes beyond the satisfaction of mere functional needs...</q>, and, <q>...where people desire an abundance of luxury, does architecture seem to be more noticeable and reveal more of itself</q>.</p>

<p>It is easy to misinterpret this as a call of materialist impetus, but the <i>Tautist</i> path to Expressionism is far more religious than frivolous: The role of architecture, for Bruno Taut, is to be a mirror for man. To understand this, it is important to immediately differentiate between <em>Architecture</em> and <em>building</em>, and consequently between <em>Architecture, the Art</em>, and <em>architecture, the craft</em>: Where <em>Architecture</em> should assume the role of <em>art</em>, <em>building</em> assumes the role of <em>craft</em>. This conception of architecture gives this term, <em>Architecture</em>, a different meaning, a different purpose, and most importantly an increased need to define and identify it.</p>

<p><blockquote>PEOPLES OF EUROPE! CREATE FOR YOURSELF SACRED POSSESSIONS—BUILD! <br /> The Monte Rosa and its foothills down to the green plains is to be rebuilt. Yes, impractical and without utility! But have we become happy through utility? Always utility and utility, comfort, convenience— good food, culture—knife, fork, trains, toilets, and yet also—cannons, bombs, instruments of murder! To want only the utilitarian and comfortable without higher ideals is boredom. Boredom brings quarrel, stride, and war... Preach the social idea... Engage the masses in a great task, which fulfils everyone, from the humblest to the foremost...Each sees in the great communality clearly the work of his own hands: each builds—in the true sense...</blockquote></p>
